# Proof of Transport - Acheiving Consensus By Doing Honest Business

Trucks will run miners. The only fair way I can think of to distribute has power and prevent a 51% (or 70%) attack on the network would be to "permission" hash power on the blockchain by having each vehicle's VIN be a validation key of some kind. The hashing power on the network would be controlled by trucking capacity and nothing else. Having a miner in a truck would require a constant internet connection. Most trucks already have this through their on-board telematics or ELD platform (or smart phone even). Because the TMS would signal that a tractor was under active dispatch, and both the shipper and receiver both confirm this, the hashing power of the miner in the tractor begins receiving transactions and running a PoW algorithm. A combination of sensors in the tractor, which have digital identities that are owned by the tractor (which has a digital identity) could provide additional proofs to be able to add a block and achieve consensus.

If every tractor runs a miner and must be under active dispatch, verified by a 3-way signature, for their hashing power to count, the hashing power of the network, and therefore security, is assured. The nodes will be able to check if the tractor solving the block was under dispatch through a mechanism similar to zcash (to be defined later, point is that the nodes can't be gamed) and if so, it can validate blocks. If not, any block solutions submitted from the tractor (linked to the parent node run by the company who owns the tractor) it will simply be ignored (and invalidated so that it can't be replayed).

If an attacker were to try to compromise the security of the chain, the attacker would have to purchase enough tractors with valid VIN#s to own at least 51% of all tractors, create fake loads that the attacker would have to get both the shipper and receiver to sign, dispatch these trucks and then they would have to actually drive them to the proscribed origins and destinations in the fake orders so try and fake a single transaction, which would be detected immediately. The point is, attacking the chain would be ridiculously expensive for little to no effect.

PoW uses a lot of power, but tractors also produce a lot of wasted energy. A 120V DC-to-AC power inverter that is capable of supplying 1500W of power is standard in most tractors. Due to the nature of DC-to-AC conversion, the power is being consumed by the inverter if the 120V outlet has a load on it or not. Because of this, powering miners off of the diesel power plant, AKA engine, while a tractor is under dispatch and going down the road, instead of this PoW scheme wasting energy, it in fact captures normally wasted energy and puts it to use. I believe that if we powered the miners to secure the network with tractors, not only is this PoW scheme carbon-neutral, one could argue it is greener as computing power normally residing in individual data centers could be off-loaded to the tractors that are producing excess energy that is not currently being captured or used.

To acheive consensus using a Proof-of-Work model and not have an "arms race" in hash power on the network, I propose a system where block solutions are only valid while the truck is dispatched on a load and moving. This prevents gaming of the system and keeps the hash rate in check. It also scales naturally with the economy: more transport = better economy = more hashing power on the network to handle the load. Brokerages would essentially rent the hashpower of the trucks the carrier owns while hauling a brokered load. 

Every blockchain needs a base token. A chain's base token is normally distributed via block rewards. By assigning a "cost" to every transaction on the network, a malicious actor could not flood the blockchain with useless transactions (spam). These base tokens have more uses that I will expand upon in another document.

To prevent a malicious actor from just adding extra hash power to the network in order to perform a 51% attack, the fact that block solutions will only be accepted by the other nodes if they come from a valid tractor (will expand upon identity management in another piece) and the nodes of both the shipper and receiver agree that the tractor is actually hauling a load. This secures the chain by making it more beneficial to actually just haul loads legitimately than to try and cheat by buying tractors, creating fake shippers and receivers, creating fake orders, then having to move the trucks from origin to destination to pull off a successfull double-spend attack. 

Not only does this solve the hashpower "arms race" normally seen in PoW blockchains, it also acts as a built-in permissioning system. Hashpower doesn't count unless it is under dispatch. In order for a truck to be under dispatch, you must have a truck, a driver with a CDL, and business relationships with the shipper and receiver. The method of using the act of doing legitimate work as part of the consensus mechanism acts as it's own self-permissioning system.
